well kata's prime minister and Minister
of Foreign Affairs Muhammad bin Abdul
Raman althani and the eu's foreign
policy Chief Joseph barell have just
addressed the media here in Doha after
meeting to discuss the war on Gaza
alzer's hasham albar was at that press
conference he joins us now live from
there hasham it sounds like they covered
a lot of ground in their discussions but
it also sounds like a a deal around
captives might not be very far
away indeed and that was that the
significant development today from that
press conference with Muhammad ABD Al's
foreign minister and prime minister
saying that they have managed to
overcome most of the sticking points and
the a boys down now just to quite some
logistical issues just to give some
sense of perspective to our viewers in
the past the biggest obstacles to a deal
that would pave the way for the release
of hostages a certain number of hostages
in exchange for humanitarian corridors
humanitarian PS and Aid to be allowed
into Gaza was basically concerns voiced
by Hamas for example that when they
start releasing the hostages they want
to ensure that there is an extended
ceasefire with no drones flying over the
areas they want to make sure that the
groups task with transporting and
carrying the hostages manage to make it
safely at the same time Israel was
insisting there's absolutely no way
they're going to allow for anything that
is going to be seen as an extended uh
pause for uh uh in in Gaza now it seems
that according to the Qatar prime
minister Minister of Foreign Affairs
they've managed to pin down all the
details and that's just a matter of time
before they announc a deal a deal broker
by Qatar and once announced it was going
to be the most significant breakthrough
since the start of the conflict in
October the 7th well we'll see how that
all all goes in the coming days
certainly hasham there was also clearly
plent of discussion between Mr Burell
and the Kat prime minister of a postwar
Gaza I have to say they're not on the
same page when it comes to what's next
they do agree the EU is saying that
Qatar is crucial for a deal however when
you saw that press conference Qatari
foreign minister extremely critical of
Israel saying that the Israelis continue
to relentlessly bombard hospitals
schools Target refugee camps civilians
the International Community is doing
nothing about it he's saying that the EU
in particular and the International
Community are applying double standard
when it comes to this issue in
particular Joseph Burell the EU Chief
Foreign Affairs policy guy is has been
describing what happened in Gaza as a
Carnage but he stopped short or short of
telling us what's next he said that the
last United Nations resolution 2712 is a
binding resolution and it has to be
implemented we have to remind our
viewers that that resolution was calling
for the need of a humanitarian POS it
did not specify the need for a
humanitarian ceasefire and it ask for
humanitarian corridors and a to be
allowed into a Gaza but the most
significant development today from that
presser by Burell when I asked him a
question about what's next for Gaza he
said Hamas is a turn chapter the
Palestinian Authority will have to take
over the Americans and the Israelis have
been trying to convince key players
globally on the need to start a new
chapter in Gaza the Arab world does not
really seem to buy into this approach
which is a palestin Authority taking
over because they know it's weak it has
been beset by corruption has been
weakened over the last few years and
it's going to be an extremely delicate
task for for them to take over Gaza once
again to the point where the Europeans
and the Americans have been floating the
idea of an Arab pece for police force
taken over for a
transitional period uh this this idea
has been completely brushed aside by the
Jordanian Minister of Foreign Affairs
who said that the notion of having Arabs
step in into togethera they will be
widely seen as colluders and traitors
now what is going to be next it seems
that the Americans themselves along with
the Israelis are taking it on a daily
basis they would like to see how it
moves on on the ground on GA in Gaza
before they decide what's next and this
explains the massive divide that you see
between some key players particularly in
the region and the International
Community and when I say the
International Community the EU and the
Americans who seem to be now trying to
put together what looks like a new
political map a new architecture for
Gaza a Gaza the insist has to be without
Hamas and the insist they would like to
see the palestin authority with its own
forces taking over he's certainly been
doubling down on that idea Hashim albaha
there with the latest for us from that
press conference thank you very much
hashen well joining me now in the studio
is muen Rabani he's the co-editor of
jadala and he's also a non-resident
fellow at the center for conflict and
humanitarian studies thank you for
joining me again on Al jazer Moen one of
the other things that was discussed well
ostensibly discussed and between the cat
prime minister and Joseph Burell was a
ceasefire he says they did talk about
that I'm curious about where that
conversation is at given the complete
lack of unity in the EU around the
notion of a ceasefire I mean you heard
hasham there talking about key divisions
between different Global players there
are certainly huge divisions within the
EU itself yes um on the one hand the
European Union has not come out with a
formal uh position in favor of of a
ceasefire but perhaps more importantly
um the United States which is the party
that would need to impose um a ceasefire
on Israel um remains resolutely against
one I think where there is Common Ground
among um European governments is this
idea of a humanitarian pause which I
think if we look at the way it's
developed is really a kind of
diversionary charade when you talk about
a humanitarian pause in the context of
The Killing Fields of the Gaza Strip it
sounds like a camaru coffee break um and
and not much more well let me ask you
then about some of the the things that
Bell said about postwar Gaza and
obviously there are there are concerns
by many Regional Powers about even
having that discussion now while the
killing is ongoing but Burell has said
and I'm quoting here he said Israel
cannot stay in Gaza Hamas cannot stay in
Gaza and as you heard hasham reporting
he's very very assertive about the fact
that the Palestinian Authority in his
view is the only legitimate power that
can take control of a postwar Gaza how
is the Palestinian Authority regarded in
Gaza well there are several issues here
um uh the first issue is that the
Palestinian Authority is disintegrating
within the West Bank where it's based so
the question becomes under even the best
of circumstances
how could it um uh project itself and
its power into the Gaza Strip second of
all is the idea that it would ride into
the Gaza Strip on the back of an Israeli
tank and this is something that even the
leadership of the Palestinian Authority
has rejected I think the more
fundamental issue here is who decides on
who leads the Palestinians is it the
Palestinian people or is it Mr Burell is
it the Palestinians or is it uh
or Mr Biden and um there's another issue
here which is that what we've seen over
the past several
decades every time Israel makes a
determined effort to eradicate a
Palestinian movement it emerges perhaps
weakened on the ground but with its
stature greatly increased and this may
well be the case uh with Hamas as well
and given the fragmentation and
disintegration of the Palestinian
movement I suspect that most
Palestinians would favor a form of
national Unity a leadership in which
there is power sharing among all the
main Palestinian political forces rather
than one to the exclusion of others so a
Palestinian Authority rather than the
Palestinian Authority exactly I'm
curious about the idea that obviously
the future of Gaza should be defined by
gazans now given the state of of the war
the lack of access seemingly how they're
being excluded from the conversation how
how does that change who can bring the
voices of gazans into these into these
political Arenas and make that that that
change for them well there are plenty of
gazin who are giving voice um uh to
their priorities and their agenda and
more broadly I mean the gazin are not a
a separate people or sect or ethnic
group um they're an integral component
of the Palestinian people um and I think
think Palestinians as a whole also have
a say in in the future um uh of Gaza of
of Gaza and here again we get back to
the main point is who decides about the
Palestinians is it the Palestinians or
is it these outside parties which I
should also add includes um a lot of
wishful thinking because all these day
after scenarios that are being proposed
by the outside Powers um presuppose a
successful iation of Hamas at least from
the Gaza Strip and by what we've seen in
the past 45 days or so um that seems to
be a very ambitious uh objective M
Rabani co-editor of J Le and a
non-resident fellow at the center for
conflict and humanitarian studies always
great to get your thoughts thank you for
joining me again